In this video, we're going to look at
SQL Alchemy and specifically, we're
going to see how to set up an
asynchronous database driver for async
connections to the database. And we'll
also see how we can tie that in with
Fast API's dependency injection system
to inject an asynchronous session into
Fast API endpoints. So, let's jump into
it. Before we do, if you want to support
the channel and you're finding this
content useful, check out our coffee
page. We've got a link in the top
comment. And let's dive in and start
with Async SQL Alchemy. Now, async
support was added in version 1.4. We are
now after version two of SQL Alchemy.
So, what we can do here is we can
install the async.io extensions and
that's because the async.io extensions,
they depend upon the green lit library.
So, let's copy this command here. In
fact, we're using UV, so we'll only copy
the name of this package. And then, if
we go back to VS Code, let's open the
terminal here and we're going to run uv
and we can paste that in there. So,
that's going to install that SQL Alchemy
async.io extension. And the next thing I
want to do is have a look at
database.py. This contains most of the
code for setting up the database engine
and also the session local object. And
we use the session maker factory
function from SQL alchemy. And that
gives us a way to create sessions with a
fixed configuration that are in this
case bound to the engine that we have
above. Now the engine is synchronous and
the sessions that are going to be
generated from that engine, they are
also synchronous at the moment. Our goal
in this video is to change these into
asynchronous engines and asynchronous
sessions and then modify the functions
that we have here to initialize the
database and also to inject a session
into fast API endpoints. So this
function here is a fast API dependency
function. But at the moment it's just
instantiating a synchronous session
local object and then yielding that to
the endpoint. So we're going to change
all of this in this video. Before we get
started with the code, why might we want
to actually do this? Why might we want
an async database driver? So being able
to do async database operations, they
allow fast API and other applications to
handle many requests at the same time
without blocking. And that's because
synchronous drivers that we have here,
they are going to wait for every
database round trip. So if we go back to
main.py and go to an endpoint, we are we
have an endpoint down at the bottom here
and we're using this query. And this
uses the older style of querying syntax.
We'll see how to change that at the end
of the video as well. But at the moment,
what's going to happen in this function
is that when we call this function here,
this synchronous database driver is then
going to send the query to the database,
and it's going to wait until the
response is received from that remote
database server, and it's going to
return the movies after that is
received. Now, there's a couple of
problems here. First of all, we have an
async function, but we're executing a
blocking operation in that function. So,
that's not a good practice, and that's
why I wanted to show that in this video.
If you have an async function in fast
API, you should not be performing
blocking IO operations. What you can do
instead if you have some code that
cannot be made asynchronous like that,
you can remove the async keyword and
fast API will then execute this function
in a separate thread. But we do want to
use async here. So we're going to bring
that back and then we can go back to
database.py and we're going to change
some of this code. So by switching to an
async driver, our application can
essentially pause when it executes this
code here. And it can then serve
additional requests while it's waiting
on that IO operation to come back from
the remote database server. So that's
the benefit of async. It's improved
scalability and better performance. You
can handle more queries, more requests
at the same time. That's essentially the
benefit. Now let's go back to
database.py. This is a typical
synchronous setup at the moment, but
we're going to go to the documentation
on async. And if we go down here, you
can see that for core use, you can use
the create async engine function that
creates an instance of async engine. And
that offers an async version of the
traditional engine API. So, we're going
to start by importing that into our
code. And we can place that at the top
here from SQL Alchemy.extensions.ync.io.
We are importing create async engine.
Now create engine is the synchronous
version. We can replace that with create
async engine. When you do that you need
to be careful about your database URL.
You can see the one that we are using at
the moment uses the psychoppg postgres
driver. Now psychopg is capable of
supporting synchronous and asynchronous
operations. So essentially it provides
an async driver as well as a synchronous
driver. But if you are using something
for example SQL light you might need to
install an additional async compatible
package. So I'm going to go to the
browser at the moment. Here is an
example of that. This is an async.io
bridge to the standard libraries SQL
light module. So if you want async
functionality with SQL light, you can
install this package. It's called AIO
SQLite. I'll leave a link to that below
the video. And similar drivers exist for
other databases. If you're using
Postgres, you can use PsychoP. Although
there are other drivers such as Async PG
that you can use. We're going to stick
with PsychoPG in this video. And if we
go to the documentation on this package,
you can see at the top here there is a
section on asynchronous support. So the
psychopg connection and cursor objects
they have counterparts async connection
and async cursor. Now this is lower
level but when we use SQL alchemy with
psychopg we don't need to worry about
this. So we can create an instance of
this engine here by calling create async
engine. And we don't need to modify this
database URL here because cyclopg
provides an async driver. Now the next
thing we need to look at is how to
procure an async session rather than a
synchronous session. So I'm going to go
back to the documentation and there is
an async session class that provides
full OM functionality. And if we scroll
down to this code you can see we can
import an async session maker function.
So let's do that just now. I'm going to
copy this import and we can bring that
in. In fact we can just paste that in
here. Async session maker is the name of
that function and that is the async
analog to this session maker function
here. So I'm going to paste that in here
and we're going to change the name of
the session local variable here. Instead
of session local, we'll call that async
session local. So essentially we are now
creating an async engine. And from that
engine we can create or procure a
session using the async session maker
function. So that gives us a fixed
session factory here and we are now
going to use that inside the get session
dependency. So this dependency here was
creating the synchronous session. I'm
going to comment this out just now. Now,
because we're going to instantiate this
async session local object, let's copy
the name of that. And we're going to use
a context manager here. But because it's
an async context manager, we need to use
async with and we can instantiate the
async session local object. And we'll
call that session here. And then we're
going to yield that session within the
async context manager. So yielding that
to the endpoint. And that session will
be cleaned up safely once that context
manager block is finished. So we can
remove this code here. And we're going
to mark the dependency function as async
as well. Don't forget to do that. And we
can then save this file. Now, if we go
to main.py, you can see how fast API
uses these dependencies. So, we import
this get session function and we pass it
to the depends object from fast API and
that allows us to inject the session
which we have as a parameter to the
route function and we can then use that
session object within the function. Now,
if we go back to database.py, there's
one final change to make in the init DB
function. When we call engine.be, we're
getting a connection to the database and
starting a transaction. But the engine
is now asynchronous. So again, this
context manager, we're going to update
that to an asynchronous context manager.
And again, this function itself is now
going to be asynchronous. So we mark
that with the async keyword. And the
final thing we have here is this base
metadata.create all function. So
remember, we're importing the
declarative base model. And SQL Alchemy
knows how to create all of the tables
based on the models that you have in
your application because it tracks those
tables within the base metadata object.
And create all gives you a way to create
the entire schema from scratch based on
those objects. Now the problem here is
that this is a synchronous method and it
wasn't designed to work with async
connections. So we're going to update
this code here. Now it turns out the
connection object that we have in this
context manager, it has a method called
run sync. And we can pass a synchronous
function to run sync. And as it says
here, it allows traditional synchronous
SQL alchemy functions to run within the
context of an async.io application. So
we can take this synchronous function
base metadata.create
all and we're going to paste that into
run sync here and that is going to run
this synchronous function in a separate
thread and it's going to return the
result asynchronously. So what we can do
here is await that result and that is
essentially the code we now need to
initialize the database and create all
of the tables using the SQL Alchemy base
object. So we've now changed our
database.py configuration to work with
async. We're going to remove the imports
that we're no longer using at the top
and we can save this module and go back
to main.py. Now, if we go to the top
here, we're going to need to change how
this actually works because we now have
asynchronous operations and currently
our functions are not awaiting the
results. So, if we look at our lifespan
function in fast API, we initialize the
database when the server starts. That is
now an asynchronous operation. So, the
first thing I'm going to do is add a
weight to that and that is responsible
for creating these tables and we've
updated the code to do that. Now, let's
go back to main.py. If we look at this
section here, we were using the session
object. Instead of that, we're now going
to use the async session. So, we're
using the session directly here. What we
do in the endpoints is we use the
session that's injected by the
dependency. But in the life the lifespan
event, sorry, we are using the session
directly. So, at the top here, rather
than importing session, we're going to
import the async session object. And we
can instantiate that directly here in
the lifespan function. And because again
that it's async, we need to use an async
context manager here. Now if we go down
to the code within the context manager,
we create two movie objects. And this is
an OM SQL alchemy model. And then we add
both of those objects M1 and M2 to the
session. And then we're calling
session.comit. When you have an async
driver though, when you call session
docomit, you need to await the database
returning the result of committing the
transaction. So again this is sending
the operation to the database to commit
the transaction and that is then going
to return the response asynchronously
from the database server. So you need to
await that with the async driver. And
then once we yield in this lifespan
event the code after that is run when
the server shuts down. So again we can
change session to async session here.
And we need to change this to an async
context manager. And what we're doing
here is using the older style of
session.query query we are deleting the
movies from the database. Now again
that's going to send the query to the
database. We can await the result of
that and we can also await the commit of
the transaction here. So we're just
adding the await keyword to both of
these statements. Now if you're using
this older style of querying using
session.query, this is not going to work
with async drivers. So if we go to the
top here, I'm going to bring in an
import that's going to make this better.
And from SQL Alchemy, we're going to
import the delete function. This allows
you to construct delete expression
objects and you can use those to delete
objects from the database. So what we
can do here is change the line of code
that we have on line 27. And instead of
session doquery, you can use
session.execute. And what I'm going to
do is delete this here. And within
session.execute, we can use the delete
function. And we can pass the model that
we want to delete, which is the movie
model, into that function. And this is
going to remove every single movie row
from that table in the database. We can
then save this and this should now be
fine when we actually start the server.
Now if we go down here to our endpoint,
this is the route function for this
endpoint and we have a session object
being injected here. We're going to
change that to an async session. And
then again, if you want to query the
database, you need to make sure you're
using the modern unified syntax for
doing so. So instead of session.query,
we can change this to session.execute.
And I'm going to go to the top of this
module and as well as delete, we can
import a function called select that
allows us to essentially construct a
select expression. If we go back down
here, we can then remove all and what
we're going to pass to session.execute
is a select call here and we're going to
select every movie instance from the
database and that is the syntax for
that. Now this is going to give us back
some results from the database. These
are going to be rows. If we want to get
back the OM objects associated with each
movie, we can use a subsequent statement
here. So we're going to call it movies
the variable and we're going to take
those results and we're going to call
dotscalers which is a function and then
dotall. Now I think it would be easier
to see this if we print results to the
terminal and I'm going to copy that and
we can then print the movies just below
that to see the difference in these
statements. So essentially we've just
changed the pattern of querying here.
Instead of using session.query, we are
now using session.execute, we are using
the select object to get the movies. And
then we are converting the rows into
movie instances. So let's test this out.
I'm going to open the terminal and we're
going to run fast API dev to start the
server. And hopefully we should see the
startup event, the lifespan event
working correctly. And you can see the
insert into movies statement here. What
we're now going to do is visit this
endpoint here /mov in the browser. So
I'm going to open the browser. And when
we go to that endpoint, we're getting an
internal server error. Now, well done if
you've noticed why we're getting this
error. I'm going to go back to the
endpoint itself. There's a handy tip
here. Attribute error. Corine object has
no attribute scalers. Now, in Python,
when you see co- routine object has no
attribute. Typically, you've forgotten
the await keyword. And that is exactly
what's happened here on line 36. We are
calling session.execute execute to get
the movies from the database, but we're
not awaiting the results of that query.
So, we need to add the await keyword
here. This is an async function. So, we
can use the await keyword. And in this
case, we're using it with an async
database operation. We can then save
that. And if we go back to this page
here, we can refresh the page and we get
the response from that endpoint with the
movies. Now, we had those print
statements. So, let's go back to the
terminal here and we're going to look at
what's been printed. Now, the first
print statement we can see is this
chunk. iterator result object. So that
is the results that we had on line 36
here after calling session.execute and
getting those movies from the database.
We printed those out here and then we
got the actual movie OM objects by
calling dotscalers.all
and you can see what that gives us back
here is a list of movie instances. So
the movie model that's the SQL alchemy
OM model and by defining this expression
here on the results we are getting back
a list of these objects. So
session.execute gives us back an
iterator object. So we can iterate over
what's been returned from the database
as part of this expression. But if we
calls scalers, we can unwrap those OM
objects and then theall function will
collect them into a Python list. Now we
can do a lot more in depth on querying
SQL alchemy on this channel and we are
preparing a in-depth course on this
topic. So that's going to be a fast API,
paidantic, SQL alchemy, and Olympic
focused course and I'm hoping to release
that in the next few months. But for
now, we're going to leave it here. There
are lots of different ways of converting
results from a database expression into
different Python objects, including OM
models. So we'll dive into that in the
future course. Now, what we've done here
is essentially refactored our
database.py objects to use async
compatible versions for engines and
sessions. And we refactored the init DB
function to create the tables using
base.madata.create
all. And we also updated our fast API
dependency function. So instead of
injecting a synchronous dependency, it's
now calling async session local which is
what we get back from our async session
maker factory function. And then it
injects that session there into the
endpoints. And we can use that in this
manner that we see here. It's just a
parameter to the endpoint. and we use
fast API's depends object to inject
that. So I hope this video has been
helpful and if you are finding this
content useful and you want to support
the channel check out our coffee page
and keep an eye out for that upcoming
fast API paidantic SQL alchemy and
Olympic course. It's by far the most
in-depth course I've ever prepared and
I'm hoping to release that in the next 2
or 3 months. And if you have any more
requests for SQL Alchemy or other
content, let me know in the comments.
Thanks again for watching and we'll see
you soon in the next video.